# Getting and Cleaning Data - CourseProject
Codebook for: TidyData.txt   
Author: Mike Kuklinski  

## Introduction 

This codebook describes the variables and the data contained within the *TidyData.txt* file, which was produced by running the *run_analysis.R* file. In addition, it goes over the transformations performed to clean up the raw data provided in the UCI HAR Dataset.

## Data Source

The UCI HAR Dataset is the ["Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset"](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones) study. The study took the measurements from accelerometers and gyroscopes within smartphones being used by test subjects. The smartphones were used by 30 individuals(subjects) who performed 6 types of exercises. The idea behind the study was to see if the measurement readings from an individual's phone instruments (acceloremeter and gyroscope) could determine what activity the individual was participating in. For additional information regarding the original rawdata variables and measurement procedures, see the *README.txt* and *features_info.txt* files provided within the UCI HAR Dataset.

see also excerpt from *features_info.txt* within UCI HAR Dataset:

*The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz.*

*Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag).*

*Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals).*


## Summary

The purpose of the *TidyData.txt* creation was to calculate the average of the mean and standard deviation measurements taken by the smartphone instruments (accelerometer and gyroscope) during the study. The data was to be grouped by the individuals as well as the exercises they were performing.

For information on the code used and the original rawdata files, see [README.md](README.html) associated with the *run_analysis.R* file.

Overall Table summary: The tidy data table consists of 180 Rows and 68 Columns. There is a row summarizing the average measurement variable reading for each of the 30 individuals, performing each of the 6 exercises (6 exercises * 30 individuals = 180 rows). The columns list the individual (1), the exercise they're performing(2), and the 66 measurements variables of the instrument readings (66 + 1 + 1 = 68).

Some of the variables are generated from just tracking the 3-axial sygnals generated by the accelerometer and gyroscope. Other variables are calculated using the 3-axial sygnals along with Euclidean norm formula to determine the magnitude of the sygnal. Finally, some of the variables are tracking the rate of change or 'Jerk' within the sygnals. 

## Variables

**Please note: 'XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions. Variables listed with "XYZ" at the end actually represent three(3) different variables, one for each axis (X, Y, and Z)   
(e.g. "timeBodyAccelerometerMeanXYZ" represents three variables: "timeBodyAccelerometerMeanX", "timeBodyAccelerometerMeanY", and "timeBodyAccelerometerMeanZ")**

#### General Alterations to Variable Names:

In order to make the variables for readable, there were several changes I made across all the measured variables in the data set. These included the following:
  
* 't' changed to 'time' to indicate the measurement was taken over the time domain  
* 'f' changed to 'freq' frequency, to indicate the measurement was in the frequency domain  
* periods, hyphens, and parenthesis ('.','-','()') were deleted   
* 'BodyBody' changed to 'Body' since this was a typo  
* 'Acc' changed to 'Accelerometer' to indicate the sensor/instrument being used, not to be confused with acceleration   
* 'Gyro' changed to 'Gyroscope' to indicate the sensor/instrument being used, not to be confused with the Gyro Sandwich  
* 'std' changed to 'StdDev' to clarify the measurement of Standard Deviation being taken  
* 'mean' changed to 'Mean' for capitilization consistency  
* 'Mag' changed to 'Magnitude' for clarification   

#### Variable Information

- "Subject"  
    - *Column:* 1
    - *Value Range/Unit:* 1-30  
    - *Description:* The individuals performing the experiment
    - *Transformation:* N/A
  
- "ExercisePerformed"  
    - *Column:* 2
    - *Value Range/Unit:*  
      
        -WALKING  
        -WALKING_UPSTAIRS  
        -WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS  
        -SITTING  
        -STANDING  
        -LAYING  

    - *Description:* Activity being performing by individual
    - *Transformation:* Originally listed as number designations in the data set. Used `merge()` to substitute in the string character descriptions.
- "timeBodyAccelerometerMeanXYZ"  
    - *Columns:* 3-5
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average mean of the accelerometer sygnal in the X,Y, and Z axis being generated by the individual's body over the time domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'tBodyAcc-mean()-XYZ' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:  

- "timeBodyAccelerometerStdDevXYZ"  
    - *Columns:* 6-8
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average standard deviation of the accelerometer sygnal in the X,Y, and Z axis being generated by the individual's body over the time domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'tBodyAcc-std()-XYZ' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*: 
    
- "timeGravityAccelerometerMeanXYZ"  
    - *Columns:* 9-11
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average mean of the accelerometer sygnal in the X,Y, and Z axis being generated by gravity over the time domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'tGravityAcc-mean()-XYZ' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*: 
    
- "timeGravityAccelerometerStdDevXYZ"  
    - *Columns:* 12-14
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average standard deviation of the accelerometer sygnal in the X,Y, and Z axis being generated by gravity over the time domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'tGravityAcc-std()-XYZ' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*: 
    
- "timeBodyAccelerometerJerkMeanXYZ"  
    - *Columns:* 15-17
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average mean of the change of accelerometer sygnal in the X,Y, and Z axis (derivative of acceleration) being generated by the individual's body over the time domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'tBodyAccJerk-mean()-XYZ' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:
    
- "timeBodyAccelerometerJerkStdDevXYZ" 
    - *Columns:* 19-21
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average standard deviation of the change of accelerometer sygnal in the X,Y, and Z axis (derivative of acceleration) being generated by the individual's body over the time domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'tBodyAccJerk-std()-XYZ' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:

- "timeBodyGyroscopeMeanXYZ"  
    - *Columns:* 22-24
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average mean of the gyroscope sygnal in the X,Y, and Z axis being generated by the individual's body over the time domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'tBodyGyro-mean()-XYZ' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:
    
- "timeBodyGyroscopeStdDevXYZ"  
    - *Columns:* 25-26
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average standard deviation of the gyroscope sygnal in the X,Y, and Z axis being generated by the individual's body over the time domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'tBodyGyro-std()-XYZ' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:

- "timeBodyGyroscopeJerkMeanXYZ"  
    - *Columns:* 27-29
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average mean of the change of gyroscope sygnal in the X,Y, and Z axis (derivative of acceleration) being generated by the individual's body over the time domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-XYZ' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:
    
- "timeBodyGyroscopeJerkStdDevXYZ"  
    - *Columns:* 30-32
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average standard deviation of the change of gyroscope sygnal in the X,Y, and Z axis (derivative of acceleration) being generated by the individual's body over the time domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'tBodyGyroJerk-std()-XYZ' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:

- "timeBodyAccelerometerMagnitudeMean"  
    - *Columns:* 33
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average mean of the accelerometer's magnitude, calculated using Euclidean norm with the 3 axis sygnals as inputs, being generated by the individual's body over the time domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'tBodyAccMag-mean()' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:
    
- "timeBodyAccelerometerMagnitudeStdDev"  
    - *Columns:* 34
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average standard deviation of the accelerometer's magnitude, calculated using Euclidean norm with the 3 axis sygnals as inputs, being generated by the individual's body over the time domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'tBodyAccMag-std()' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:
    
- "timeGravityAccelerometerMagnitudeMean"  
    - *Columns:* 35
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average mean of the accelerometer's magnitude, calculated using Euclidean norm with the 3 axis sygnals as inputs, being generated by gravity over the time domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'tGravityAccMag-mean()' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:

- "timeGravityAccelerometerMagnitudeStdDev"  
    - *Columns:* 36
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average standard deviation of the accelerometer's magnitude, calculated using Euclidean norm with the 3 axis sygnals as inputs, being generated by gravity over the time domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'tGravityAccMag-std()' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:

- "timeBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitudeMean"  
    - *Columns:* 37
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average mean of the change of accelerometer's magnitude (derivative of acceleration), calculated using Euclidean norm with the 3 axis sygnals as inputs, being generated by the individual's body over the time domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'tBodyAccJerkMag-mean()' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:

- "timeBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitudeStdDev"  
    - *Columns:* 38
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average standard deviation of the change of accelerometer's magnitude (derivative of acceleration), calculated using Euclidean norm with the 3 axis sygnals as inputs, being generated by the individual's body over the time domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'tBodyAccJerkMag-std()' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*

- "timeBodyGyroscopeMagnitudeMean"  
    - *Columns:* 39
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average mean of the gyroscope's magnitude, calculated using Euclidean norm with the 3 axis sygnals as inputs, being generated by the individual's body over the time domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'tBodyGyroMag-mean()' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:
    
- "timeBodyGyroscopeMagnitudeStdDev"  
    - *Columns:* 40
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average standard deviation of the gyroscope's magnitude, calculated using Euclidean norm with the 3 axis sygnals as inputs, being generated by the individual's body over the time domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'tBodyGyroMag-std()' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:

- "timeBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitudeMean"  
    - *Columns:* 41
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average mean of the change of gyroscope's magnitude (derivative of accelaration), calculated using Euclidean norm with the 3 axis sygnals as inputs, being generated by the individual's body over the time domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'tBodyGyroJerkMag-mean()' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:

- "timeBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitudeStdDev"  
    - *Columns:* 42
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average standard deviation of the change of gyroscope's magnitude (derivative of accelaration), calculated using Euclidean norm with the 3 axis sygnals as inputs, being generated by the individual's body over the time domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'tBodyGyroJerkMag-std()' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:
    
- "freqBodyAccelerometerMeanXYZ"  
    - *Columns:* 43-45
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average mean of the accelerometer sygnal in the X,Y, and Z axis being generated by the individual's body over the frequency domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'fBodyAcc-mean()-XYZ' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:
    
- "freqBodyAccelerometerStdDevXYZ"  
    - *Columns:* 46-48
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average  standard deviation of the accelerometer sygnal in the X,Y, and Z axis being generated by the individual's body over the frequency domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'fBodyAcc-std()-XYZ' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:
               
- "freqBodyAccelerometerJerkMeanXYZ"  
    - *Columns:* 49-51
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average mean of the change of accelerometer sygnal (derivative of acceleration) in the X,Y, and Z axis being generated by the individual's body over the frequency domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'fBodyAccJerk-mean()-XYZ' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*: 
    
- "freqBodyAccelerometerJerkStdDevXYZ"  
    - *Columns:* 52-54
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average standard deviation of the change of accelerometer sygnal (derivative of acceleration) in the X,Y, and Z axis being generated by the individual's body over the frequency domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'fBodyAccJerk-std()-XYZ' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*: 
 
 - "freqBodyGyroscopeMeanXYZ"  
    - *Columns:* 55-57
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average mean of the gyroscope sygnal in the X,Y, and Z axis being generated by the individual's body over the frequency domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'fBodyGyro-mean()-XYZ' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*: 

 - "freqBodyGyroscopeStdDevXYZ"  
    - *Columns:* 58-60
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average standard deviation of the gyroscope sygnal in the X,Y, and Z axis being generated by the individual's body over the frequency domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'fBodyGyro-std()-XYZ' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:             

- "freqBodyAccelerometerMagnitudeMean"  
    - *Columns:* 61
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average mean of the accelerometer's magnitude, calculated using Euclidean norm with the 3 axis sygnals as inputs, being generated by the individual's body over the frequency domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'fBodyAccMag-mean()' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:
    
- "freqBodyAccelerometerMagnitudeStdDev"  
    - *Columns:* 62
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average standard deviation of the accelerometer's magnitude, calculated using Euclidean norm with the 3 axis sygnals as inputs, being generated by the individual's body over the frequency domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'fBodyAccMag-std()' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:

- "freqBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitudeMean"  
    - *Columns:* 63
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average mean of the change of accelerometer's magnitude (derivative of acceleration), calculated using Euclidean norm with the 3 axis sygnals as inputs, being generated by the individual's body over the frequency domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'fBodyAccJerkMag-mean()' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:
    
- "freqBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitudeStdDev"  
    - *Columns:* 64
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average standard deviation of the change of accelerometer's magnitude (derivative of acceleration), calculated using Euclidean norm with the 3 axis sygnals as inputs, being generated by the individual's body over the frequency domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'fBodyAccJerkMag-mean()' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:

- "freqBodyGyroscopeMagnitudeMean"  
    - *Columns:* 65
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average mean of the gyroscope's magnitude, calculated using Euclidean norm with the 3 axis sygnals as inputs, being generated by the individual's body over the frequency domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'fBodyGyroMag-mean()' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:   
 
- "freqBodyGyroscopeMagnitudeStdDev"  
    - *Columns:* 66
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average standard deviation of the gyroscope's magnitude, calculated using Euclidean norm with the 3 axis sygnals as inputs, being generated by the individual's body over the frequency domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'fBodyGyroMag-std()' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*: 

- "freqBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitudeMean"  
    - *Columns:* 67
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average mean of the change of gyroscope's magnitude (derivative of acceleration), calculated using Euclidean norm with the 3 axis sygnals as inputs, being generated by the individual's body over the frequency domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'fBodyGyroJerkMag-mean()' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:  

- "freqBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitudeStdDev"  
    - *Columns:* 68
    - *Value Range/Unit:* Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].  
    - *Description:* The average standard deviation of the change of gyroscope's magnitude (derivative of acceleration), calculated using Euclidean norm with the 3 axis sygnals as inputs, being generated by the individual's body over the frequency domain.
    - *Transformation:* Initially 'fBodyGyroJerkMag-std()' in the dataset. See also *General Alterations to Variable Names*:  